Revise the explanation of the cartridge header (#422)
gbdev/pandocs: src/The_Cartridge_Header.md

# The Cartridge Header

Each cartridge contains a header, located at the address range `$0100`-`$014F`.
The cartridge header provides the following information about the game itself and the hardware it expects to run on:

## 0100-0103 – Entry Point

After displaying the Nintendo logo, the built-in [boot ROM](<#Power-Up Sequence>) jumps to
to address `$0100`, which should then jump to the actual main program
in the cartridge.
Most commercial games fill this 4-byte area with a [`nop` instruction](https://rgbds.gbdev.io/docs/v0.5.2/gbz80.7/#NOP) followed by a [`jp $0150`](https://rgbds.gbdev.io/docs/v0.5.2/gbz80.7/#JP_n16).

## 0104-0133 – Nintendo Logo

These bytes contain a bitmap that is displayed when the Game Boy is powered on.
They must match the following (hexadecimal) dump, otherwise [the boot ROM](<#Power-Up Sequence>) won't allow the game to run:

```
CE ED 66 66 CC 0D 00 0B 03 73 00 83 00 0C 00 0D
00 08 11 1F 88 89 00 0E DC CC 6E E6 DD DD D9 99
BB BB 67 63 6E 0E EC CC DD DC 99 9F BB B9 33 3E
```

> 

Reviewer: Adding an explanation of how the thing is encoded might be a good idea?

```suggestion

The way pixels are encoded is as follows: ([more visual aid](https://github.com/ISSOtm/gb-bootroms/blob/2dce25910043ce2ad1d1d3691436f2c7aabbda00/src/dmg.asm#L259-L269))

- $0104–011B encode the top half of the logo, $011C–0133 encode the bottom half of it.
- For each half, each nibble encodes 4 pixels (the MSB corresponds to the leftmost pixel, the LSB to the rightmost); a pixel is lit if its bit is set.
- The 4-pixel "groups" are laid out top to bottom, left to right.
- And finally, the monochrome models upscale the entire thing by a factor of 2 (leading to somewhat chunky pixels).

```

Author: Is the logo encoded in a different manner than regular tiles/sprites? I don't remember off the top of my head, but basically what I am asking is that could the explanation be replaced with a link to the pertinent section of the PPU documentation?

Reviewer: Yes, it is encoded differently. https://github.com/ISSOtm/gb-bootroms/blob/2dce25910043ce2ad1d1d3691436f2c7aabbda00/src/dmg.asm#L221

> The Game Boy's boot procedure **first displays** the logo and **then verifies**
> its contents. If the contents do not match the values above, the boot
> ROM **locks itself up**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Game Boy's boot procedure [first displays the logo and then checks](<#bypass>) that it matches the dump above.
If it doesn't, the boot ROM **locks itself up**.
```

## 0134-0143 – Title

These bytes contain the title of the game in upper case ASCII.
If the title is less than 16 characters long, the remaining bytes should be padded with `$00`s.

Parts of this area actually have a different meaning on later cartridges, reducing the actual title size to 15 ($0134–$0142) or 11 characters ($0134–$013E); see below.

## 013F-0142 – Manufacturer Code

In older cartridges these bytes were part of the Title (see above).
In newer cartridges they contain a 4-character manufacturer code (in uppercase ASCII).
Its purpose is unknown.

## 0143 – CGB Flag

In older cartridges this byte was part of the Title (see above).
CGBs and later models interpret this byte to decide whether to enable Color mode ("CGB Mode"), or to fall back to monochrome compatibility mode ("Non-CGB Mode").

Typical values are:

Value | Meaning
------|------------------------------------------------------------------
`$80` | The game supports CGB enhancements, but is backwards compatible with monochrome Game Boys
`$C0` | The game works on CGB only (the hardware ignores bit 6, so this really functions the same as `$80`)

> Values with bit 7 set, and either bit 2 or 3 set, will switch the
> Game Boy into a special non-CGB-mode called "PGB mode".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Values with bit 7 set, and either bit 2 or 3 set, will switch the Game Boy into a special non-CGB-mode called "PGB mode".
```

# The Cartridge Header

Each cartridge contains a header, located at the address range `$0100`-`$014F`.
The cartridge header provides the following information about the game itself and the hardware it expects to run on:

## 0100-0103 — Entry Point

After displaying the Nintendo logo, the built-in [boot ROM](<#Power-Up Sequence>) jumps to address `$0100`, which should then jump to the actual main program in the cartridge.
Most commercial games fill this 4-byte area with a [`nop` instruction](https://rgbds.gbdev.io/docs/v0.5.2/gbz80.7/#NOP) followed by a [`jp $0150`](https://rgbds.gbdev.io/docs/v0.5.2/gbz80.7/#JP_n16).

## 0104-0133 — Nintendo Logo

This area contains a bitmap that is displayed when the Game Boy is powered on.

> They must match the following (hexadecimal) dump, otherwise [the boot ROM](<#Power-Up Sequence>) won't allow the game to run:

Reviewer: Leftover from when "This area" was "These bytes".
```suggestion
It must match the following (hexadecimal) dump, otherwise [the boot ROM](<#Power-Up Sequence>) won't allow the game to run:
```

```
CE ED 66 66 CC 0D 00 0B 03 73 00 83 00 0C 00 0D
00 08 11 1F 88 89 00 0E DC CC 6E E6 DD DD D9 99
BB BB 67 63 6E 0E EC CC DD DC 99 9F BB B9 33 3E
```

The way pixels are encoded is as follows: ([more visual aid](https://github.com/ISSOtm/gb-bootroms/blob/2dce25910043ce2ad1d1d3691436f2c7aabbda00/src/dmg.asm#L259-L269))

> - $0104–011B encode the top half of the logo, $011C–0133 encode the bottom half of it.

Reviewer: Should addresses be written in backticks or not? This PR isn't very consistent, but the rest of Pan Docs isn't either; we should at least decide it for this PR and harmonize the rest later.

- For each half, each nibble encodes 4 pixels (the MSB corresponds to the leftmost pixel, the LSB to the rightmost); a pixel is lit if its bit is set.
- The 4-pixel "groups" are laid out top to bottom, left to right.

> - And finally, the monochrome models upscale the entire thing by a factor of 2 (leading to somewhat chunky pixels).

Reviewer: The point was to say that this is done after all of the other transformations.

## 013F-0142 — Manufacturer Code

In older cartridges these bytes were part of the Title (see above).
In newer cartridges they contain a 4-character manufacturer code (in uppercase ASCII).
Its purpose is unknown.

## 0143 — CGB Flag

In older cartridges this byte was part of the Title (see above).
CGBs and later models interpret this byte to decide whether to enable Color mode ("CGB Mode"), or to fall back to monochrome compatibility mode ("Non-CGB Mode").

Typical values are:

Value | Meaning
------|------------------------------------------------------------------
`$80` | The game supports CGB enhancements, but is backwards compatible with monochrome Game Boys
`$C0` | The game works on CGB only (the hardware ignores bit 6, so this really functions the same as `$80`)

Values with bit 7 set, and either bit 2 or 3 set, will switch the Game Boy into a special non-CGB-mode called "PGB mode".

::: tip Research needed

PGB modes are not well researched or documented yet.
Help is welcome!

:::

## 0144-0145 — New Licensee Code

This area contains a two-character ASCII "licensee code" indicating the game's publisher.

> It is only meaningful if the [Old Licensee Code](<#014B — Old Licensee Code>) is exactly $33 (which is essentially all games made after the SGB was released); otherwise, the old code must be considered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is only meaningful if the [Old Licensee Code](<#014B — Old Licensee Code>) is exactly $33 (which is essentially the case for all games made after the SGB was released); otherwise, the old code must be considered.
```

# The Cartridge Header

> Each cartridge contains a header, located at the addresses `$0100`-`$014F`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each cartridge contains a header, located at the address range `$0100`-`$014F`.
```

> The cartridge header contains the following information:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The cartridge header provides the following information:
```

## 0100-0103 – Entry Point

After displaying the Nintendo logo, the built-in boot procedure jumps to

> this address (`$0100`), which should then jump to the actual main program

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to address `$0100`, which should then jump to the actual main program
```

in the cartridge. Usually (but not always) this 4-byte area contains a `nop`
instruction followed by a `jp $0150` instruction.

## 0104-0133 – Nintendo Logo

These bytes contain a bitmap of the Nintendo logo that is displayed
when the Game Boy is powered on. The hex dump of this bitmap is:

```
CE ED 66 66 CC 0D 00 0B 03 73 00 83 00 0C 00 0D
00 08 11 1F 88 89 00 0E DC CC 6E E6 DD DD D9 99
BB BB 67 63 6E 0E EC CC DD DC 99 9F BB B9 33 3E
```

> The Game Boy's boot procedure **first displays** the logo and **then verifies**

Reviewer 2: why the bold usage here?

Author: I found the fact that the logo is _first_ displayed and only _then_ verified a bit surprising, so I guess I wanted to emphasize that. But I agree with @ISSOtm's comment - there's no point in going into the details of the power-up sequence in this document, since that is outside its scope. @ISSOtm would you mind making the change?

its contents. If the contents do not match the values above, the boot
ROM **locks itself up**.

A CGB verifies only the first half (`$18` bytes) of the bitmap, but other models

> (the Game Boy Pocket, for example) verify all `$30` bytes, as does the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(e.g. the Game Boy Pocket) verify all `$30` bytes, as does the
```

> Game Boy Advance.

Reviewer 2: This part is quite unclear. Other models (like game pocket) verify all bytes, like the GBA? Doesn't sound okay

Reviewer 3: The GBA does not check all bytes actually (which can be seen in the disassembly https://github.com/ISSOtm/gb-bootroms/blob/master/src/cgb.asm).

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the heads up @CasualPokePlayer. Link is a bit problematic as the source is leaked material. Maybe we can just link to a specific line or give some context and a link instead of copying that information here?

Reviewer 3: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0dJrYeRbIgc there's also this video showing the GBA only doing the half logo check.

Reviewer 2: > https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0dJrYeRbIgc there's also this video showing the GBA only doing the half logo check.

This may be good enough for now. Maybe we can prepare a test rom?

Reviewer 3: Better wording here might just be "CGB and future devices only check the first half, while all pre-CGB devices check the full logo." Although an interesting point in that is on the SGB, while the full logo is checked, it is not be the bootrom. The bootrom simply sends the logo to the SNES software (as can be seen in the diassembly in that repo), which then that SNES software verifies the logo (and refuses to boot if it's wrong).

## 0134-0143 – Title

> These bytes contain the title of the game in UPPER CASE ASCII.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These bytes contain the title of the game in upper case ASCII.
```

If the title is less than 16 characters long, the remaining bytes all have the
value `$00`.

While developing the CGB, Nintendo reduced the length of this area
to 15 characters, and some months later they had the fantastic idea to reduce it
further to just 11 characters. The new meanings of the bytes `$013F`-`$0143` are
described below.

## 013F-0142 – Manufacturer Code

In older cartridges these bytes were part of the Title (see above).
In newer cartridges they contain a 4-character manufacturer code

> (uppercase). The exact purpose of the code is unknown.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(uppercase). The purpose is unknown.
```

## 0143 – CGB Flag

In older cartridges this byte was part of the Title (see above). In

> CGB cartridges the most significant bit is used to enable CGB functions. This is

Reviewer 2: Why is this "required"? It sounds like what an "enable" does anyway

required; otherwise the CGB switches itself into Non-CGB-Mode.

> Typical values are:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Possible values are:
```

Author: What @ISSOtm said - there are other possible values.

Code  | CGB support
------|------------------------------------------------------------------
`$80` | The game supports CGB functions (but also works on old Game Boys)
`$C0` | The game works on CGB only (physically the same as `$80`)

Values with bit 7 set, and either bit 2 or 3 set, will switch the
Game Boy into a special non-CGB-mode called "PGB mode".

> TODO: research and document PGB modes...

Reviewer 2: This should go into a "Research needed" box

## 0144-0145 – New Licensee Code

These bytes specify a two-character ASCII licensee code indicating the
developer/publisher of the game. The New Licensee Code is present in newer

> cartridges only (those released after the SGB was invented).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
cartridges only (those released after the SGB was released).
```

> These bytes specify a two-character ASCII licensee code indicating the
> developer/publisher of the game. The New Licensee Code is present in newer
> cartridges only (those released after the SGB was released).
> Older cartridges use the Old Licensee Code at `$014B` instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This area contains a two-character ASCII "licensee code" indicating the game's publisher.
It is only meaningful if the [Old Licensee Code](<#014B – Old Licensee Code>) is exactly $33 (which is essentially all games made after the SGB was released); otherwise, the old code must be considered.
```

`08` | Capcom
`13` | Electronic Arts
`18` | Hudson Soft
`19` | B-AI
`20` | KSS
`22` | Pow
`24` | PCM Complete
`25` | San-X
`28` | Kemco
`29` | SETA
`30` | Viacom
`31` | Nintendo
`32` | Bandai
`33` | Ocean/Acclaim
`34` | Konami
`35` | Hector
`37` | Taito
`38` | Hudson Soft
`39` | Banpresto

> `41` | Ubisoft

Reviewer 4: Point of style: Ubisoft was known as Ubi Soft prior to 2003 according to [its article on Logopedia](https://logos.fandom.com/wiki/Ubisoft). Should we use the modern spelling or the GB era spelling?

Author: That's a good question, I was thinking about that as well. I went through every single company in those two lists and Ubisoft is not the only one that is subject to this issue.

I would argue that, since the name is not stored as a verbatim string in the game binary, it makes sense to refer to the entity with its present name, but I can see the other point of view as well. And it does bother me that this solution is not entirely technically correct, which is the best kind of correct. 😛

Reviewer: Given that the company that was licensed and that published the game was what it was back then, I'll advocate for the old style.

Reviewer 5: "Ubisoft (Ubi Soft until 2003-09-09)"

The SGB will ignore any [packets](<#Command Packet Transfers>) if this byte is set to a value other than $03 (which is typically $00).

## 0147 – Cartridge Type

This byte indicates what kind of hardware is present on the cartridge, notably its [mapper](#MBCs).

Code  | Type
------|------
`$00` | ROM ONLY
`$01` | MBC1
`$02` | MBC1+RAM
`$03` | MBC1+RAM+BATTERY
`$05` | MBC2
`$06` | MBC2+BATTERY
`$08` | ROM+RAM [^rom_ram]
`$09` | ROM+RAM+BATTERY [^rom_ram]
`$0B` | MMM01
`$0C` | MMM01+RAM
`$0D` | MMM01+RAM+BATTERY
`$0F` | MBC3+TIMER+BATTERY
`$10` | MBC3+TIMER+RAM+BATTERY [^mbc30]
`$11` | MBC3
`$12` | MBC3+RAM [^mbc30]
`$13` | MBC3+RAM+BATTERY [^mbc30]
`$19` | MBC5
`$1A` | MBC5+RAM
`$1B` | MBC5+RAM+BATTERY
`$1C` | MBC5+RUMBLE
`$1D` | MBC5+RUMBLE+RAM
`$1E` | MBC5+RUMBLE+RAM+BATTERY
`$20` | MBC6
`$22` | MBC7+SENSOR+RUMBLE+RAM+BATTERY
`$FC` | POCKET CAMERA
`$FD` | BANDAI TAMA5
`$FE` | HuC3
`$FF` | HuC1+RAM+BATTERY

[^rom_ram]:
No licensed cartridge makes use of this option. The exact behavior is unknown.

[^mbc30]:
MBC3 with 64 KiB of SRAM refers to MBC30, used only in _Pocket Monsters: Crystal Version_ (the Japanese version of _Pokémon Crystal Version_).

## 0148 – ROM Size

> This byte specifies the size of the ROM on the cartridge. In most cases the ROM size
> is given by `32 KiB x (2 ^ <value>)`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This byte indicates how much ROM is present on the cartridge.
In most cases, the ROM size is given by `32 KiB × (1 << <size>)`:
```

Author: I'm not sure the shift expression is an improvement. 🤔

Reviewer: The "power" operator like this is ambiguous with XOR. A double-star might work if you think shifting is not a good idea.

Author: Good point, I didn't think of that. Let's go with the shift then.

Code  | ROM size  | Number of ROM banks
------|-----------|-----------------
`$00` |  32 KiB   | 2 (no banking)
`$01` |  64 KiB   | 4
`$02` | 128 KiB   | 8
`$03` | 256 KiB   | 16
`$04` | 512 KiB   | 32
`$05` |   1 MiB   | 64
`$06` |   2 MiB   | 128
`$07` |   4 MiB   | 256
`$08` |   8 MiB   | 512
`$52` | 1.1 MiB   | 72 [^weird_rom_sizes]
`$53` | 1.2 MiB   | 80 [^weird_rom_sizes]
`$54` | 1.5 MiB   | 96 [^weird_rom_sizes]

[^weird_rom_sizes]:
Only listed in unofficial docs. No cartridges or ROM files using these sizes are known.

> As the other ROM sizes are all powers of 2, these are likely inaccurate. The source of these
> values is unknown.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the other ROM sizes are all powers of 2, these are likely inaccurate.
The source of these values is unknown.
```

## 0149 – RAM Size

> This byte indicates how large the RAM chip on the cartridge is, if any.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This byte indicates how much RAM is present on the cartridge, if any.
```

If the [cartridge type](<#0147 – Cartridge Type>) does not include "RAM" in its name, this should be set to 0.
This includes MBC2, since its 512 × 4 bits of memory are built directly into the mapper.

Code  | SRAM size | Comment
------|----------|---------

> `$00` |   0       | No RAM [^mbc2]
> `$01` |   –       | Unused [^2kib_sram]
> `$02` |   8 KiB   |  1 bank
> `$03` |  32 KiB   |  4 banks of 8 KiB each
> `$04` | 128 KiB   | 16 banks of 8 KiB each
> `$05` |  64 KiB   |  8 banks of 8 KiB each
> 
> [^mbc2]:

Reviewer: This is now covered by the paragraph above, no need to make it a footnote anymore.

```suggestion
`$00` |   0       | No RAM
`$01` |   –       | Unused [^2kib_sram]
`$02` |   8 KiB   |  1 bank
`$03` |  32 KiB   |  4 banks of 8 KiB each
`$04` | 128 KiB   | 16 banks of 8 KiB each
`$05` |  64 KiB   |  8 banks of 8 KiB each

```

> When using a MBC2 chip, `$00` must be specified as the RAM Size, even though
> MBC2 cartridges contain an on-chip RAM of 512 x 4 bits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

[^2kib_sram]:

> Listed in various unofficial docs as 2 KiB. However, a 2 KiB RAM chip was never used in a cartridge.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Listed in various unofficial docs as 2 KiB.
However, a 2 KiB RAM chip was never used in a cartridge.
```

The source of this value is unknown.

> Various "PD" ROMs ("Public Domain" homebrew ROMs, generally tagged with `(PD)`
> in the filename) are known to use the `$01` RAM Size tag, but this is believed
> to have been a mistake with early homebrew tools, and the PD ROMs often don't use
> cartridge RAM at all.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Various "PD" ROMs ("Public Domain" homebrew ROMs, generally tagged with `(PD)` in the filename) are known to use the `$01` RAM Size tag, but this is believed to have been a mistake with early homebrew tools, and the PD ROMs often don't use cartridge RAM at all.
```

## 014A – Destination Code

> This byte specifies whether this version of the game is intended to be sold in
> Japan or elsewhere.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This byte specifies whether this version of the game is intended to be sold in Japan or elsewhere.
```

Only two values are defined:

Code  | Destination
------|------------
`$00` | Japan (and possibly overseas)
`$01` | Overseas only

## 014B – Old Licensee Code

This byte is used in older (pre-SGB) cartridges to specify the game's publisher.
However, the value $33 indicates that the [New Licensee Code](<#0144-0145 – New Licensee Code>) must be considered instead.
(The Super Game Boy will ignore packets unless this value is $33.)

Here is [a list of Old Licensee Codes](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/gb-archive/salvage/master/txt-files/gbrom.txt).

## 014C – Mask ROM Version number

This byte specifies the version number of the game.
It is usually $00.

## 014D – Header Checksum

> This byte contains an 8-bit checksum computed from the cartridge header bytes
> `$0134`-`$014C`. The boot ROM computes the checksum as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This byte contains an 8-bit checksum computed from the cartridge header bytes `$0134`-`$014C`.
The boot ROM computes the checksum as follows:
```

```c
uint8_t checksum = 0;

> for (uint16_t address = 0x0134; address < 0x014C; address++) {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for (uint16_t address = 0x0134; address <= 0x014C; address++) {
```
"There are two hard things in programming:"

    checksum = checksum - rom[address] - 1;
}
```

> The boot ROM verifies this checksum. If the byte at `$014D` does not match the
> lower 8 bits of `checksum`, the boot ROM will lock up, and the program on the
> cartridge **won't run**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The boot ROM verifies this checksum.
If the byte at `$014D` does not match the lower 8 bits of `checksum`, the boot ROM will lock up, and the program in the
cartridge **won't run**.
```

`99` | Pack in soft
`A4` | Konami (Yu-Gi-Oh!)

## 0146 – SGB Flag

> This byte specifies whether the game supports SGB functions.

Reviewer 2: Why repeat "this byte"? we're explaining it anyway..

Reviewer: I agree the repetition isn't all that great, but I think it's acceptable to be more precise, and can be less monotonous by alternative with "this area" and/or "this field".

Author: I think in a technical text precision is preferable to elegance, and I simply thought that "this byte" is a consistent way to format things.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Common values are:
> 
> Code  | SGB support
> ------|-----------------------------------------------------
> `$00` | No SGB functions (regular Game Boy or CGB-only game)
> `$03` | The game supports SGB functions
> 
> The SGB disables its SGB functions if this byte is set to a value other than `$03`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SGB will ignore any [packets](<#Command Packet Transfers>) if this byte is set to a value other than $03 (which is typically $00).
```

## 0147 – Cartridge Type

> This byte indicates what kind of Memory Bank Controller (and other hardware)
> the cartridge contains.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This byte indicates what kind of hardware is present on the cartridge, notably its [mapper](#MBCs).
```

Code  | Type
------|------
`$00` | ROM ONLY
`$01` | MBC1
`$02` | MBC1+RAM
`$03` | MBC1+RAM+BATTERY
`$05` | MBC2
`$06` | MBC2+BATTERY
`$08` | ROM+RAM [^rom_ram]
`$09` | ROM+RAM+BATTERY [^rom_ram]
`$0B` | MMM01
`$0C` | MMM01+RAM
`$0D` | MMM01+RAM+BATTERY
`$0F` | MBC3+TIMER+BATTERY
`$10` | MBC3+TIMER+RAM+BATTERY [^mbc30]
`$11` | MBC3
`$12` | MBC3+RAM [^mbc30]
`$13` | MBC3+RAM+BATTERY [^mbc30]
`$19` | MBC5
`$1A` | MBC5+RAM
`$1B` | MBC5+RAM+BATTERY
`$1C` | MBC5+RUMBLE
`$1D` | MBC5+RUMBLE+RAM
`$1E` | MBC5+RUMBLE+RAM+BATTERY
`$20` | MBC6
`$22` | MBC7+SENSOR+RUMBLE+RAM+BATTERY
`$FC` | POCKET CAMERA
`$FD` | BANDAI TAMA5
`$FE` | HuC3
`$FF` | HuC1+RAM+BATTERY

[^rom_ram]:
No licensed cartridge makes use of this option. The exact behavior is unknown.

[^mbc30]:

> MBC3 with a 64 KiB RAM refers to MBC30, used only in
> _Pocket Monsters: Crystal Version_ (the Japanese version of
> _Pokémon Crystal Version_).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MBC3 with 64 KiB of SRAM refers to MBC30, used only in _Pocket Monsters: Crystal Version_ (the Japanese version of _Pokémon Crystal Version_).
```

## 0148 – ROM Size

This byte specifies the size of the ROM on the cartridge. In most cases the ROM size
is given by `32 KiB x (2 ^ <value>)`:

Code  | ROM size  | Number of ROM banks
------|-----------|-----------------
`$00` |  32 KiB   | 2 (no banking)
`$01` |  64 KiB   | 4
`$02` | 128 KiB   | 8
`$03` | 256 KiB   | 16
`$04` | 512 KiB   | 32
`$05` |   1 MiB   | 64
`$06` |   2 MiB   | 128
`$07` |   4 MiB   | 256
`$08` |   8 MiB   | 512
`$52` | 1.1 MiB   | 72 [^weird_rom_sizes]
`$53` | 1.2 MiB   | 80 [^weird_rom_sizes]
`$54` | 1.5 MiB   | 96 [^weird_rom_sizes]

[^weird_rom_sizes]:
Only listed in unofficial docs. No cartridges or ROM files using these sizes are known.
As the other ROM sizes are all powers of 2, these are likely inaccurate. The source of these
values is unknown.

## 0149 – RAM Size

> This byte specifies the size of the RAM on the cartridge (if any).

Reviewer 2: Again, there's no need of repeating "this byte" on every pararaph..

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

If the [cartridge type](<#0147 – Cartridge Type>) does not include "RAM" in its name, this should be set to 0.
This includes MBC2, since its 512 × 4 bits of memory are built directly into the mapper.

```
...and then the footnote below would be removed.
Then, we'd also delete the MBC2 footnote.

Code  | RAM size | Comment
------|----------|---------
`$00` |   0      | No RAM [^mbc2]
`$01` |   –      | Unused [^2kib_sram]
`$02` |   8 KiB  |  1 bank
`$03` |  32 KiB  |  4 banks of 8 KiB each
`$04` | 128 KiB  | 16 banks of 8 KiB each
`$05` |  64 KiB  |  8 banks of 8 KiB each

[^mbc2]:
When using a MBC2 chip, `$00` must be specified as the RAM Size, even though
MBC2 cartridges contain an on-chip RAM of 512 x 4 bits.

[^2kib_sram]:
Listed in various unofficial docs as 2 KiB. However, a 2 KiB RAM chip was never used in a cartridge.
The source of this value is unknown.

Various "PD" ROMs ("Public Domain" homebrew ROMs, generally tagged with `(PD)`
in the filename) are known to use the `$01` RAM Size tag, but this is believed

> to have been a mistake with early homebrew tools and the PD ROMs often don't use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to have been a mistake with early homebrew tools, and the PD ROMs often don't use
```

cartridge RAM at all.

## 014A – Destination Code

This byte specifies whether this version of the game is intended to be sold in
Japan or elsewhere.

Only two values are defined:

Code  | Destination
------|------------

> `$00` | Japan
> `$01` | Other

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`$00` | Japan (and possibly overseas)
`$01` | Overseas only
```

## 014B – Old Licensee Code

> This byte is used in older (pre-SGB) cartridges to specify the developer/publisher
> of the game. The value `$33` indicates that the New Licensee Code (in header bytes
> `$0144`-`$0145`) is used instead. (Super Game Boy functions will only work if the
> value is `$33`.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This byte is used in older (pre-SGB) cartridges to specify the game's publisher.
However, the value $33 indicates that the [New Licensee Code](<#0144-0145 – New Licensee Code>) must be considered instead.
(The Super Game Boy will ignore packets unless this value is $33.)
```

> A list of Old Licensee Codes can be found
> [here](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/gb-archive/salvage/master/txt-files/gbrom.txt).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is [a list of Old Licensee Codes](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/gb-archive/salvage/master/txt-files/gbrom.txt).
```

## 014C – Mask ROM Version number

> This byte specifies the version number of the game. The value is usually `$00`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This byte specifies the version number of the game.
It is usually $00.
```

## 014D – Header Checksum

This byte contains an 8-bit checksum computed from the cartridge header bytes
`$0134`-`$014C`. The boot ROM computes the checksum as follows:

```c

> checksum := 0
> address  := 0x0134
> while address <= 0x014C:
> 	checksum := checksum - [address] - 1
> 	address  := address + 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
uint8_t checksum = 0;
for (uint16_t address = 0x0134; address < 0x014C; address++) {
    checksum = checksum - rom[address] - 1;
}
```
If we want it highlight it as C, let's make it proper C! :stuck_out_tongue:

```

The boot ROM verifies this checksum. If the byte at `$014D` does not match the
lower 8 bits of `checksum`, the boot ROM will lock up, and the program on the
cartridge **won't run**.

## 014E-014F – ROM Checksum

These bytes contain a 16-bit (big-endian) checksum simply computed as the sum of
all the bytes of the cartridge ROM (except these two checksum bytes).

> The boot ROM does not verify this checksum.

Reviewer 2: Why the change from "Game Boy" to boot rom?

Reviewer: Because it's more precise, honestly. Though you are right that for a general negation, the suggested passive voice is better.

Author: Again what @ISSOtm said - just stating that the checksum is verified by the Game Boy is pretty ambiguous. While the exact details of the boot procedure are outside the scope of this document, I don't think it's bad to simply mention that it is the boot ROM that does the checksum checking.

> The boot ROM does not verify this checksum.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This checksum is not verified.
```

Author: I think referring to the boot ROM in this paragraph as well reduces the likelihood of any kind of confusion, so I would prefer to keep the former wording.

Reviewer 3: If it's worth a mention, the Game Boy Tower actually verifies this checksum.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This checksum is not verified, except by the GB Tower's boot ROM.
```

Do you have a source we can quote?

Reviewer 3: The GB Tower's boot ROM does not verify it (in fact it is a literal copy of the MGB bootrom, or otherwise its peculiar CGB bootrom in Stadium 2 for the GBC games). It's when it's loading in the ROM file (presumably error handling in case transfer pak here failed). It's not particularly hard to check (given an emulator able to handle it) or even just real hardware (which is what I checked).

Author: @ISSOtm If you could resolve this final issue then I think this PR will be ready for merge. :)
